[Convex Proximal Point Method, Part I](Convex%20Proximal%20Point%20Method,%20Part%20I.md)


---
### **Proximal Point in the Rockafellar Manner**

This section will only summarize key results from Rockafellar's writing of the proximal point method in the convex case. 
Rockfellar's work has the perspective of maximal monotone operators and variational inequalities description of PPM method, very early on. 

In this section we briefly view over how geniuses like Rockafellar handles the situations. 
He heavily makes use of theories of monotone operators in Hilbert spaces, and he focuses more on the iterates than the function value. 
His analysis is a world of difference compare to Guler's work which inspired all previous sections. 
This part will follow the works of Rockafellar^[R. T. Rockafellar, “Monotone Operators and the Proximal Point Algorithm,” SIAM J. Control Optim., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 877–898, Aug. 1976, doi: 10.1137/0314056.]. 

#### **Proposition 5.1 | PPM and Monotone Operators**
> With $P_k:= (1 + c_kT)^{-1}$, where $T$ is a maximally monotone operator. 
> Consider for all $k$, $c_k > 0$.
> Define $Q_k = I - P_k = (I - (c_kT)^{-1})^{-1}$. 
> Then $0\in T(z) \iff P_k(z) = z \iff Q_k(z) = 0$. 
> And the following are all true for all $k$: 
> 1. $z = P_k(z) + Q_k(z)$ and $c_k^{-1}Q_k(z) \in T(P_k(z))$ for all $z$. 
> 2. $\langle P_k(z) - P_k(z'), Q_k(z) - Q_k(z')\rangle \ge 0$ for all $z, z'$. 
> 3. $\Vert P_k(z) - P_k(z')\Vert^2 + \Vert Q_k(z) - Q_k(z')\Vert^2 \le \Vert z' - z\Vert^2$ for all $z, z'$. 

**Proof**

**For (1)**, $I = P_k + Q_k$ is Moreau decomposition. 
From the definition of resolvent it has 
$$
\begin{aligned}
    (\forall x) \;x + c_kTx &\ni Px, \text{let x = $P_k z$}
    \\
    \implies
    c_k TP_kz + P_kz 
    &\ni z
    \\
    \iff
    c_k TP_kz 
    &\ni z - P_k z = Q_kz. 
\end{aligned}
$$

**For (2.)**, consider monotonicity of $T$, by abusing the notation: 

$$
\begin{aligned}
    (\forall z, z') \;
    0 &\le \langle Tz - T z', z - z'\rangle
    \quad 
    \\
    \text{let }(z, z') &= (P_kz, P_kz')
    \\
    \implies
    0 &\le 
    \langle TP_kz - TP_kz', P_kz - P_kz'\rangle 
    \\
    &=
    \langle Q_kz - Q_kz', P_kz - P_kz'\rangle. 
\end{aligned}
$$

For (3.), it's the firmly non-expansiveness of the resolvent operator. 
For more information, visits [Firmly Nonexpansive Operators](../Operators%20Theory/Firmly%20Nonexpansive%20Operators.md). 

**Remarks**

The first item 1. is crucial to show the convergence of proximal point algorithms in the most general case. 


#### **Approximation Criteria**
When an algorithm approximates proximal point method with $x_{z + 1} \approx P_k(z_k)$, the following criteria characterizes the type of error that we can work with. 

$$
\begin{aligned}
    &\Vert z_{k + 1} - P_k z_k\Vert \le \epsilon_k,\;  \sum_{k = 0}^{\infty} \epsilon_k < \infty, 
    & ([A])
    \\
    & \Vert z_{k + 1} - P_k z_k\Vert \le
    \delta_k \Vert z_{k + 1} - z_k\Vert, 
    \sum_{k = 0}^{\infty} \delta_k < \infty . 
    & ([B]) 
\end{aligned}
$$


---
### **Existence of the fixed points**

The following theorem cited in Rockafellar's work refers to a equivalent conditions for the existence of a fixed point on a maximally monotone operators. 

---
### **Convergence claims**


#### **Theorem 5.2 | Weak Convergence of PPM**
> Let $(z_k)_{k\in \N}$ be any sequence generated by the PPM satisfying the approximation criteria. 
> Suppose that $(z_k)_{k\in \N}$ is bounded (if and only if $\exists z: \mathbf 0 \in Tz$). 
> Then $(z_k)_{k\in \N}$ converges weakly to point $z_\infty$, and we have 
> $$
> \begin{aligned}
>   \lim_{k\rightarrow \infty} \Vert Q_k(z_k)\Vert = 0 = \lim_{k\rightarrow \infty} \Vert z_{k + 1} - z_k\Vert. 
> \end{aligned}
> $$


**Proof**

Skipped, and try to read the original paper with $\epsilon_k = 0$, and then read it again with the approximation criteria in mind. 
A lot of Rockafellar's proof is dedicated to justifying the bounded sequence assumption in Hilbert space. 

**Remarks**

There is a counterexample in Rockafellar's writing indicating that $\epsilon_k\rightarrow 0$ is insufficient for the convergence of the proximal point method. 
The counter example is based on a $T$ such that $T^{-1}(\mathbf 0)$ has more than one element in it. 
This theorem 1 in Rockafellar's writing of proximal point method. 